---
layout: post
title:  "How To Create New Numbers — A Perspective on Ring/Field Theory and Analysis"
katex: true
---

# Preface

The purpose of this blog post is to present a broad overview of undegraduate-level abstract algebra from an alternative perspective. Often, fundamental algebraic structures — most notably groups, rings/modules, and fields — are presented in purely abstract and formal terms. This is essential for providing a logical and rigorous foundation for the discipline, but, at least as it was for me as an undergrad, it fails to explain *why* these structures were invented in the first place and, more importantly, *why* they are defined the way they are and not some other way.

Simply put, I want to reframe abstract algebra, specifically Ring and Field Theory, as the branch of mathematics concerned with creating new number systems, understanding their properties and limitations, and how the *insolvability* of various problems in these number system grants us the ability to create new number systems.

When I talk about creating new number systems, I do not mean substituting one symbol for another, such as replacing the Arabic numerals $1, 2, 3, 4...$ with Chinese characters 一, 二, 三, 四, etc. or Roman numerals *I, II, III, IV* or any other real or fictitious set of symbols. What I mean is extending an existing number system, such as the integers, by new numbers with desirable properties absent from the original number system. A classic example of this is the complex numbers: we take the existing real numbers and simply add in a new "number" $i$ which satisfies $i^2 = -1$. But, this explanation is unsatisfying. How can we just make up a new number like this? What does $i$ even mean? What's stopping us from adding whatever "number" we want satisfying and properties we desire? How can we guarantee this number system is <span class="annotated">consistent<span class="popup">A number system is consistent if it has no logical contradictions</span></span>?

This will be a long read, as it is no easy task to condense hundreds and hundreds of pages of dense mathematical texts spanning algebra, analysis, and number theory into a single article. You can find links to the major sections below.

<div align="center" style="background: #c4c4c4; border: 2px solid black; border-radius: 10px; margin-bottom: 20px">
    <h4>
        <p>
            <a href="#the-integers">The Integers $\mathbb{Z}$</a><br>
            <a href="#the-rationals">The Rationals $\mathbb{Q}$</a><br>
            <a href="#the-reals">The Reals $\mathbb{R}$</a><br>
            <a href="#the-complex-numbers-algebraic-closure">The Complex Numbers $\mathbb{C}$ and Algebraic Closure</a><br>
            <a href="#rings-fields-field-extensions">Rings, Fields and Field Extensions</a><br>
            <a href="#quaternions-generalized-complex-numbers">Quaternions and Generalized Complex Numbers</a><br>
            <a href="#finite-fields">$\mathbb{F}_p$ and Finite Fields</a><br>
            <a href="#p-adics">$p$-adics</a><br>
            <a href="#what-next">What's Next?</a><br>
        </p>
    </h4>
</div>

May this article teach you something new, elucidate a concept you've been grappling with, or just simply be a fun read.

---

<a name="the-integers"></a>

# The Integers $\mathbb{Z}$

---

<a name="the-rationals"></a>

# The Rationals $\mathbb{Q}$

---

<a name="the-reals"></a>

# The Real Numbers $\mathbb{R}$

---

<a name="the-complex-numbers-algebraic-closure"></a>

# The Complex Numbers $\mathbb{C}$ and Algebraic Closure

---

<a name="rings-fields-field-extensions"></a>

# Rings, Fields and Field Extensions

---

<a name="quaternions-generalized-complex-numbers"></a>

# Quaternions and Generalized Complex Numbers

---

<a name="finite-fields"></a>

# $\mathbb{F}_p$ and Finite Fields

---

<a name="p-adics"></a>

# $p$-adics

---

<a name="what-next"></a>

# What's Next?